Felly, mae gennym bwysau am Hermann, ac roedd yna un o'r cyllid cyllid yng Nghymru,
o Osio Osmond, a'i gweithwyr, gweithwyr, gweithwyr, a'i gweithwyr cymdeithasol.
A roedd yn dda, nid oedd yn dda, roedd yn dda, ymlaen, ymlaen, ymlaen, ymlaen.
Ac yn y blaen, yn y blaen, mae'n dda, a'r bwyd yw,
un camera dan nifer ym misuaeth y transparent, joseph Hermann o gorau ei hunain fywyd ym P patientswar gweithred y 1911,
fel ein math o arr strangers yn ystod ein造ig buridod y 1940au a'r 50au.
Y stydd rydyn nhw'n cofod mille fel y mifications bennaf o Shelter.
Na, dwhanfrof efo imi lyniadwy, roeddwn i yn dweud, well beth fyddwydτικio joseph Hermann?
Felly roeddwn i'n dweud, why don't I do it in sort of set myself for questions?
Right, sort of tidying my mind a bit.
And starting off, and then, well, who was Joseph Herman?
Right? Birth, family, he was born in 1911,
and he was a Jewish-Polish artist who was remembered for his depictions
in the Welsh mining community in Estegdanais.
He was born in Warsaw, Poland, in January 1911.
The eldest of three children, they were very, very poor,
he went to school until the age of 12,
and then later became an apprentice printer.
He attended the Warsaw School of Art, what I gleaned, from 1930 to 1932,
and exhibited for the first time in Warsaw in 1932.
Now, Warsaw at that time and Poland was very anti-Semitic.
Very, very, you know, the Germans and the Nazis didn't invent anti-Semitism.
No, it was rife in Poland, and particularly in Warsaw.
So in 1938, that's a year before the outbreak of the Second World War,
at the age of 27, he fled Poland for Belgium
because there was a mountain of anti-Semitism in Poland.
And of course, as I said, this is prior to the outbreak of the...
one year before the outbreak of World War II.
The following year, the Nazis invaded Poland in 1939, and the war broke out.
Well, he was in Belgium now,
and he rather liked the expressionist artist of Belgium.
He was in Brussels, actually.
Rather than that, in other words, he thought intellectual artists
of Paris, the impressionists.
So he was allowed to be in Belgium.
And there was one story that he says he liked the police in Brussels.
He said he would walk the streets and talk to the police, and they were rude.
He would have stayed in Belgium, actually.
But of course, the following year, anti-40 Nazi Germany invaded Belgium,
and so he had to flee again, and he fled through France.
And he had a good luck, because he was travelling through France.
Travelling from somewhere called June...
June, July...
Oh, very odd name.
June, July Rice, I think her name was.
An American gave him a lift as far as Bordeaux,
and in Bordeaux, he heard that there were ships going from La Rochelle to Canada
for members of the Polish army who had fled Poland to join the British army.
So he actually got on that ship, but it was obvious that he wasn't a soldier.
But he thought it was first...
He was misled and thought it was going to Canada, but he ended up in Liverpool.
The words of a soldier went for the army, the British army,
but he was told to report to the consul in Glasgow,
so he got a hitchhiked to Glasgow.
So he was in Glasgow in 1940, and there was quite a number of refugees there,
and quite a number, actually, of Jewish refugees.
And they had even met up with an old friend,
a younger uncle, Adla.
I'm so sorry, his Jewish name's hopelessly...
Difficult, yes.
Adla, and he's quite a famous artist, and he knew him in Warsaw.
So he became very friendly with him.
He taught a bit of art, he exhibited in Edinburgh,
and there he met Katriona MacLeod.
She was an heiress from the Isle of Skye.
She liked his art, she followed him to Glasgow,
persuaded him to take her as a student,
but he wouldn't, but he eventually married her.
So he was married in 1943, I think, to Katriona MacLeod.
But before that, actually, in 1942,
he had heard from the British Red Cross that all his family,
every member of his family had been destroyed
in the Holocaust.
The Jews in Warsaw had been herded into a ghetto,
and in the ghetto, they were then persuaded after a while,
look, we'll take you to a camp, but they didn't know what a camp was.
But fortunately, he thought it was a...
Fortunately, they didn't get to Auschwitz,
but they were cast in the vans.
All his family.
I can't believe these things.
There was no one. He was the only survivor.
They were all murdered.
He was a dissented man because he had a very, very bad breakdown,
and Adlaen lived through that.
And then, as I said, he later, just a year later,
he married Katriona, Katriona,
he's called her Katriona, which I've just forgotten.
And they went to London.
Now Katriona was pregnant in London,
and there was a lot of bombing, because what type?
So he was advised now to come to Wales
by a friend called David Martin,
who also was very friendly with David Alexander Williams,
a carpenter in a scheduling colony.
Now, it's very difficult for me at first to sort of to reconcile this.
How come that a carpenter working in a scheduling colony
was also a friend of David Martin?
Who is David Martin?
He was a journalist.
He already met Herman in Glasgow
because he worked for the Daily Express in Glasgow.
So he was Jewish.
So I thought David Martin is not a Jewish name.
I discovered, because I'm nauseous,
I discovered that he, I was intrigued by it actually,
David Martin was Ludwig Denzel.
I'm mispronouncing that, I can tell you.
And born in Budapest, but educated in Berlin,
but a whole family got out of Europe,
and his parents went to London,
and he left Berlin in 1934 to Israel,
and then he was with the International Brigade
and the Spanish Civil War.
So he was, but he was a writer.
He came to London.
How did a writer who was Jewish
become friendly with David Alexander Williams?
It may be because they shared left-wing politics.
It may be because he was a writer,
and David Alexander Williams became quite well known
as a short story writer.
Much of his work was published.
So David Martin, of course, wrote Tiger Bay,
the book Tiger Bay, and had come to us to recognise.
I know in his biography he mentions that he stayed
with David Alexander Williams,
and his friend Peggy, Dialect, we called him,
in Otfellow Street, David Martin had.
So I had a contact with David, I made the connection,
David Martin had told Joseph Herman,
we'll go to Wales, we'll be quiet.
You like the people of Wales.
And that's how it all began,
that he came to a Scottish.
But he met Dialect in Brecon,
and this is what he says actually,
doesn't know how he came to Brecon,
but in his own words.
My Scottish wife, Tationa, was pregnant and needed,
so the doctor said, to get away from Walthon, London,
and get some restful nights.
A journalist friend, David Martin,
just back from Wales, suggested that we go there.
I cannot say how or why we arrived in Brecon.
Brecon at that time was as noisy as Piccadilly Circus.
American soldiers and girls and laughter
from the small hours each night.
Then on our first night arrived unexpectedly in Otfell,
a strange visitor, a carpenter.
Who worked in a connery was also a short story writer,
Dy Alex Williams.
He arrived with his blonde and friendly wife, Peggy.
Apparently my London friend wrote to Dy Alex,
told him about our well-abouts,
and asked him to get in touch with us.
So, I think I've told you all about David Martin now,
who was the link between the two.
And really, I suppose that this time I should make another connection
before I say where he came to win in Astran,
and that is the connection inside a village.
Now Dy Alex had been the liaison.
Dy Alex now, a short story writer, carpenter.
Colerty, right?
He'd also been the liaison via the miners federation
with the Czech government in London,
the Czech legation.
Arranging some sort of,
and arranging for them,
they're bringing together the villagers and miners in Cwmgyedd
to do a re-enactment of literacy.
So he doesn't feature in the film,
but he was the link,
and with Humphrey Jennings, the director.
So the link between the three, getting them together.
So he was very passionate about the side of the village.
Very proud of the villagers, it isn't bad.
So he had told David Martin about it,
you know, many, many times.
David Martin was also intrigued by the whole thing,
being Jewish.
And David Martin told Joseph Herman the story,
the side of the village.
When again Joseph Herman met with Dy Alex,
he also told him again about the side of the village.
So he was very keen to come to the village,
to come to Estrikenais for several reasons,
and that's one of the reasons actually,
because he had known beforehand of the story of the side of the village.
There's the connection again, a connection, right?
And that connection is Dy Alex bringing Joseph Herman here,
and Dy Alex being the liaison or the contact between the groups.
Byard actually, Dy Francis in the Miners Federation
asked him to do that.
So he's in Estrikenais,
so he comes first of all to stay with David Pecky in Arford Street,
two up, two down, or one up, one down.
It was very, very small, no bathroom or anything.
Catriona was an heiress actually,
from a very, very rich whiskey family in the highland sky.
I say that once he came,
he was so happy that he was welcomed by everyone,
and he has supposedly said,
allegedly, I haven't seen this written down,
but I heard that he said,
I do not have to explain my life to these people,
because they know.
But people after the making of the side of the village were very,
especially in Miners, very anti-fascist.
And he was also, but it's in the book that he said,
I found all that I required.
So he stayed with Peck and Dave,
we call them Peck and Dave, right?
Dy Alex and his wife,
for about three weeks.
And then he decided to stay,
and he moved to the Pennebott, Pennebott Inn.
The Hodges were the landlords,
Roy Hodges and his wife.
Is it Hodges? Hodges, sorry.
I'm not quite sure.
In the Pennebott, and they rented
a living room, a bedroom, and a ballroom.
John asked me if they did in the ballroom,
but he painted there.
And while they were there,
they were there for about 18 months before
they decided, the Hodges decided to move
and go farming.
And they became quite friendly at that time,
and he didn't want to stay there,
they didn't want to stay there with new landlords.
But while they were there,
he painted in oil, Katria, his wife,
and that portrait is still there.
It's now with the National Library in Aberystwyth.
He also painted three,
or drew, painted one and drew,
three characters who featured
in the sign of village.
And he did that when he was in the Pennebott.
If you've seen the sign of village,
they really are very striking.
Yes, I have seen it.
You've seen it, you know,
there was a Llew North, we called him,
his name was Llew Chords,
but he was from the North,
and was known as Llew North.
Very charismatic, the three that do it.
Then there was Henry John Williams,
and Henry John Williams,
his drawing of Henry John Williams
is in a private collection in Estred.
And then Sid Bowen, another one,
a very, as I say, very striking looking,
very Hollywood looking,
considering there were no professional actors
in the film, astounding.
And that drawing is also in a private collection
in Estred.
And those were,
not what you would expect Joseph Herman to have done,
because we see his art as monuments,
in a sense, to something.
So this is before his method changed.
So these three portraits were most definitely done
when he was in the Pennebott.
Then up on the side of the Pennebott,
you can see out in two,
what was then called Goff Buildings,
now called Rested Vowr,
and he saw Nestling in the Weeds, I always say,
an old pop factory.
It was not a news, I think, it was a storage.
And Catrier bought the old pop factory
and they converted it into a dwelling, of course,
and a studio for each,
because Catrier was also an artist, Catrier Herman.
She was quite a flamboyant and lively character, actually.
In her own right, she was quite startling.
And very friendly and loved as strict and nice.
So they settled there, and it's there in the studio,
they remained until 1955,
and their marriage broke up,
and they went their different ways,
and that was 1955.
And the time, the studio was built
by a builder, Islwyn Thomas,
and also a lot of the carpentry work
and the fish pond was done by the Roberts Brothers,
Dai Roberts in particular,
and his wife, Nancy, was there every day as a companion.
And so that Carole, Carole Roberts, Carole Rouser,
do you know her?
She was more or less brought up there,
so I always say if people want to know
exactly what went on in the studio,
who came there, who were their friends, etc.,
they would only have to ask Carole.
She lives in Cardiff,
and she knows quite a lot about their lives in the studio,
and particularly Catrier, she was very well fond of Catrier.
Catrier, as I said, was quite a personality.
She loved children,
and she had organised on one occasion
the children of the building, Leicester Fowl now,
to perform Cinderella.
And we tried to track down the cast, actually.
Cinderella was merely his,
since she now lives in Washington.
So just difficult to track down.
To have a re-enactment of Cinderella
with everybody being very much older,
very, very.
And Carole, she was the musical director.
She was a very good pianist.
So she was very lively, very colourful.
I know she made for me,
because I lived on a farm from the end,
she made for me a marionette,
a little puppet theatre.
I played with,
I was an only child as well,
and I played until it collapsed.
So she was very friendly,
and she loved Mr. Gullness.
He immersed himself in life here.
He came to the Melfer Hall
for one of the concerts.
He was chair of the choir,
the Mr. Gullness Mewroch Choir,
which at that time,
rehearsed and performed at Melfer Hall.
He had many friends.
He had Leo Morgan, the photographer,
T.J. Davies, the photographer.
Dianna and Peggy,
they went to London in 1950,
because from a captain in the mines,
he became then an exhibition officer
for the newly formed National Court Board.
I lived in London.
That was a leap, I know.
So they went up close from there on,
about that time on.
T.J. Davies, Leo Morgan,
Menna Gully,
she was a very big friend of Herman,
and Herman painted her in the nude.
And that also is in a private collection
in Ystrak-an-Lest.
Oh, there are some really lovely stories,
but I can't tell them, actually.
Naughty stories, really, about him.
He was very naughty.
Very lively, very naughty.
Yes.
We'll leave it at that.
But she left in 1949,
because her husband,
who was a lecturer,
philosopher in Swansea,
went to lecture in Keele University,
and from Keele to Ulster,
and much later on to Cambridge,
where she then met up with Joseph Herman
when he was living in Suffolk.
So they were lifelong friends.
She wrote many novels,
and she was fearless.
Very interesting, Talita.
So it would be lovely if you could
have many artist friends there,
you know,
Mary Falk is another
woman artist.
She came to the studio
and remained a lifelong friend.
People who were politically motivated.
It was a very politicised time, actually.
Yes.
So many of them would be
from the left wing.
Diana himself had been a member
of the Communist Party
until the 1950s,
and the Soviet invasion of Hungary,
and then he came out of the Communist Party.
So people who were very, very left wing.
Another big friend of his was Jim Lewis.
He was a lovely chap.
He had shopped Jim on the square
in his Gendwin arms.
That area was called the square,
and it was very important for
protests and things
throughout the 20th century.
Well, big protests always there.
I know that.
The square.
I've heard something there now.
Yeah.
I want to have something to
to get people to remember that.
A bench or a plaque would say something,
you know.
Yeah.
And it was seriously just called Red Square.
Because Jim himself was very left wing
in the shop.
Shopped Jim Bach.
So there was Jim,
there was Llew,
TJ Davis,
and lots more.
Everybody seemed to welcome him
back to Port of the Welfare Hall.
Also they had many visitors
or Carol Rosa tells me,
many visitors who were
Jewish artists and writers.
One in particular, Martin Bloch.
Also,
Chlediwr,
but from Silesia,
from Poland or Hungary.
So she in part could fill you in
about lots of those intellectuals,
really,
who gathered in the studio.
It was a very lively place.
It was very fair.
Now, why did he stay?
Well, you know,
I think I answered that as a question
I put as well to my son.
Why did he stay?
Well, one would be friendships.
The way that he actually,
they did embrace
and immerse themselves in village life.
But another thing I think is most important
is the time.
It is a time of, say, 1945
of post-war optimism.
A rebirth, as he himself called it,
a rebirth.
It is the time of the
newly formed
National Health Service, NHS.
It was the active government.
The welfare state.
So you had a lot of joy,
a lot of looking forward to
a new order, shall we say,
a new time.
So there was that optimism.
There was the friendship.
And so it was time.
He was in the, as were Roberts,
and then,
Bill Roberts is quite a well-known Welsh artist
from Neath.
All right?
And he was a very good friend as well.
Sir Leifold, another good friend.
And Will Roberts said, well, yes,
he was here at the right time,
in the right place,
at the right time.
And I thought that was, well,
when you really have to examine the time
to understand that, you know.
And how everybody celebrated this,
you know, this new order.
Order, yeah, a new era.
A new era.
Didn't have to be seen again.
So I covered where he lived.
Not at finish and say,
well, what did he think of us?
Many, many,
many, many books written about him, actually.
And things like that.
Well, in 1946, really,
when he came to Britain,
he spoke six languages.
But when he came to Britain,
he didn't speak English,
but he picked it up very quickly.
Not, he said, Welsh is too difficult, he said.
Part is six, he wrote in the Welsh review.
And I'll just take it.
X class, that was called,
the mining village.
And in his own words,
the mining village differs from others I know.
First of all, in its colour,
violet roofs at the foot of green hills,
pyramids of black tips surrounded by cloud,
by trees the colour of dark bottles.
When the sun appears and gills the air,
the streets otherwise,
only from grey, become copper brown.
There you are,
said a man with a soft voice of secrecy to me.
Such is life, yeah, mostly grey,
but there's also a drop of gold.
For weeks I wandered here in the hills,
in the little streets,
looking at the landscape,
looking at walls and at men,
at pits from far and near,
sketching and talking to miners
on the surface and on the ground,
at work and at rest,
studying their movements
and their appearance.
The miner is a man of a strickeness.
In his appearance on the workforce site
like other workers,
the miner is more impressive and singular.
Sometimes I thought of old Egyptian carvings
walking between sky and earth,
or of dark locks fashioned into glorious human shapes,
or of heavy logs in which a primitive hand
had tried to synthesise the pride of human labour,
and a calm force which promises to guard its dignity.
It would be true to say that the miner
is a walking monument to labour.
Now what's extraordinary that he could write like that,
so poetically,
and in short the time.
I say because his visits to the strickeness library
in the mine as well.
Oh, he used to like to visit as well.
I forgot about the two I should have finished there,
that when he was in the studio,
he painted the parlours for the Festival of Britain,
for the pavilion of islands minerals,
it is called,
the Festival of Britain 1951,
which made him quite famous,
they were huge and it became quite famous.
Can I say something quickly about
obviously the Joseph Herman Foundation
to put onto the edge,
yes, yes.
Just to say how his heritage then is being,
is being preserved and remembered in the area to this day.
I can't show you any person,
and I'll tell you,
people used to say to me,
and by that time I owned the studio,
because Diana bought the studio
when he was living in London,
so I had a home here as well,
and I inherited the studio.
So people used to say,
and I knew,
I knew of course I was in Portis,
but I didn't think of doing anything,
but people said,
well, you know,
people must recognise and realise
just as significant this is,
well, I could see significance as 20th century,
mid-20th century,
just like the sign of village,
two events in town,
which would get interested.
So I'm talking to Anne about it,
when we were walking along the street,
from the cross actually,
right up to the welfare hall.
Now Anne and I were both on the board
of the Miners Welfare Hall,
and I said,
I don't know what to do,
I don't join,
just because John Marley,
listen to our conversation,
he added,
let's do something with children,
there are people.
So we, let's go in and ask,
that's a good idea.
So I always say,
it was all down to John Marley.
And so we went,
and the hall saw wind,
and we said we should do something,
and he crossed our trains,
and he said,
yes, we should actually.
I tell you what,
he said, I'll get an artisan residence,
and we'll find a school around here,
an artisan residence,
and we did that,
and it was Cynllais School,
it was the first school.
Schools, the names of schools
come out of the heart.
So it was then,
I should say,
part of the board of the Miners Welfare Hall,
right?
The Miners Welfare Hall is the father.
Right.
It began there.
So if Alan and I had just been us,
we would have been on the board of the hall.
We probably would have done every school,
eventually, in Ystrak-y-Garnais.
But wind met Caroline Davies,
who was the Arts Development Officer
for Swansea City.
And she said,
and he told her what we were doing,
and she knew of Joseph Herman,
and she'd actually written a children's book
for schools on Joseph Herman.
She said,
can we join you?
So she brought her friend.
Oh, we found a committee,
sort of,
not independent of the board,
but a sort of appendage or something,
you know, someplace.
There were board members as well.
It grew, it grew.
And we thought we would
sort of make it a more formal,
by 2004,
because now we were doing
schools, residencies,
and with Caroline Davies' help now,
Caroline Davies,
because she, as Arts Development Officer,
she had contacts with the Arts Development Officers
for Wales, Ceredigion,
Cymraedyn, Yn y Potamboedd,
you know.
So we thought it would grow that way.
So we became,
we thought we'd formalise things
and became a company limited by guarantee,
a charitable status.
And so it goes on.
And then we found there was some money
with Spirit European Funding.
We employed a project manager
over Agriphus for two years anyway.
Then after the Blue Tate,
Tate Bittin contacted us.
By that time, Eleanor,
Eleanor, Ylbina was involved in,
and the telephone came,
the phone came from the Tate
to the Miners Welfare Hall.
And we heard about it,
we thought it must be a joke.
Can't possibly be true.
Tate Bittin, Roedd y,
Bittin asked us to give it.
No.
No, impossible.
We sat in it for two days.
And we had, yeah, we tried,
you see what it is.
And it was indeed Tate Bittin asked us
to get involved in this project.
And we thought that took two years.
And that indeed helped it to grow,
to really become different,
more known about.
And then, when Eleanor was project manager,
wanted everything to be bilingual.
I think we were producing things.
We were having grants, you know,
we were always looking for grants,
wasn't it?
It becomes, oh, I don't know.
I like breezes, I am.
So difficult.
Yeah.
But during Owen Lepis's time,
which was funded by the European Fund,
he told us about the Nationalist Devon.
This would be 2007.
It was a long time ago.
So why not have a sponsor,
Dev is a Bobble,
just sponsor in it.
So it's the people's choice
in Lle Celf, in the art pavilion,
it's the last day of the Nusenegwod.
And they wrote it all week
and it's announced and money given.
And we would raise money for it.
So Anne and I,
I think we have gone all over the place.
You have no idea.
From banks to teleconvery,
to the town council,
oh, and more and more.
Give her money now,
but there's 500 prize.
Well, I wrote to Rowan Williams
because I'd been in the Tate,
because before we became involved in the Tate,
Tate incentives and in the book shop.
And there was an article by Rowan Williams
and his interest in art.
So I thought, well, well.
So I wrote to him and asked him
if he'd become a patron.
I said, you don't know this.
And he wrote back to me and said,
you honor me.
So we, now with the prizes and this,
we asked him if he would come
and give the prize.
Now we were only sponsoring.
There was a problem.
But he said, yes, I can.
And it was in Rexhill.
And he came on his own on the train.
No entourage, no security men.
So for the first time then, I think,
the ice dead man took us very seriously
because we had the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Oh, and he was absolutely fantastic.
He's a lovely man.
I met him a few times.
It's absolutely fantastic.
And they changed the name of the prize.
So it wasn't there was a bubble
sponsored or supported by Joseph Herman.
It was the Joseph Herman Art Award.
There was a bubble.
So the Joseph Herman Art Award at the top.
And that's thanks to Rowan Williams
setting up to give the prize.
Amazing, isn't it?
So, you know, things like that
are things like the tit.
They helped us to become known.